---
layout: page
title: "Generics"
description: "A look at generics in Java. How to use them as well as how to write classes that are generic"
permalink: /cs61b/generics/
category: cs61b
# tags will also be used as html meta keywords.
tags:
  - cs61b
  - java
  - data structures
show_meta: true
comments: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
nofollow: false
---

As we're writing Java code, we are in the position where we want to make it as flexible as possible. That's why we introduce generics. For 61B, you'll be using generics a lot. First of all, you'll be using generics when you are using someone else's generic libraries, such as the Java built-in libraries, or the Princeton Standard Library. You'll also be in the position where you are the library writer and must make your own code flexible for when other people use it.
=== Using Generics
Using generics is pretty straightforward. We just need to specify the generic types. We can see this in the following example.
~~~
{}{}
import java.util.ArrayList;

public class BasicArrayList {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        ArrayList<String> L = new Arraylist<String>();
        L.add("potato");
        L.add("ketchup");
        String first = L.get(0);
    }
}
~~~

An Arraylist is one of the many data structures from the Java library that uses generics. When we specify the type of the generic to be String in the above example, the ArrayList now becomes an ArrayList specifically for Strings. Note that we cannot use primitives like ints for the type of a generic. You will have to use the Java wrapper classes, like Integer.

=== Implementing Something Generic
A lot of people can get confused on how to make a generic class. The syntax can be a bit intense, but it is manageable.

Let's start with the usual ways to specify generic types. We have:

- E for element
- K for key
- V for value
- T for type

Each of these plays into different data structures and will be used so. So how are we going to use them. Let's look at an example from lecture

~~~
{}{}
public class Vessel<E> {

    public void put(E x)
    public E peek()

}
~~~

I'm not really interested in the implementation as much as I am with what the signatures are. We have here a Vessel class that is mean to store things. We want to make it generic so that way if someone wants to take our code and use it to store things, then they should be allowed to store whatever they want. We see that in the class declaration, we included the formal type. Basically, it's like a dummy variable in math. Whenever someone uses our class specifies the actual generic types, it's like substituting the variable out for the actual type. Once we declared the formal types, we can then use it throughout the class, as seen in the code snippet above. E's are everywhere.

Now what we saw before was making the class itself generic. Now what about the case where we want to also be able to take in something generic.

~~~
{}{}
public class VesselHelper {

    public static <T> T remove(Vessel<T> v)

}
~~~

The method declaration for this is a bit different. Here we have a method remove that wants to take in a generic method and remove stuff from it. We once again have stuff in <>. This is the formal type declaration. It's telling Java that for this method, T is a dummy variable. Compare this to if we had something like this

~~~
{}{}
    public static T remove(Vessel<T> v)
~~~

This is different. Here we're saying that there is an actual class called T and that this remove method is specialized to remove from Vessels that contain T. That's different from saying that T is a dummy variable that should be replaced by something else

Finally for our class, you'll be seeing upper bounds and wildcards. When we use generics, at times we want to limit how generic it can actually be. For example, if you have a method that needs to do comparing, you'll probably want to limit the generic to comparables. That's when upper bounds come in. If you use an upper bound, then the person must put in something that is or is a subclass of the bound. 

You may also have wildcards. This is for when you're making a method that takes in generics and you might be taking in more than one generic thing. Let's say that you didn't care what they were. Then you can just use a wildcard. You can also bound wildcards to be of a certain type. Not that you cannot declare something as a wildcard or return a wildcard. It doesn't make sense.

~~~
{Complete VesselHelper}{}
public class VesselHelper { 

    public static <T> T remove(Vessel<T> v)
    public static <T extends Comparable<T>> T max(Vessel<T> x, Vessel<T> y)
    public static double ratio(Vessel<? extends Number> x, Vessel<? extends Number> y)

}
~~~
