---
layout: page
title: "Heaps"
description: "A look at binary heaps and their operations"
permalink: /cs61b/heaps/
category: cs61b
# tags will also be used as html meta keywords.
tags:
  - cs61b
  - java
  - data structures
show_meta: true
comments: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
nofollow: false
---

Sometimes when we are storing things, when we want to get something back, we want something with the highest priority, or maybe the smallest priority. There's this notion that things can be compared and that we want the smallest or biggest thing. The data structure that support this is called a priority queue. As we've seen before queues are a type of disabled list, with FIFO (First in, first out) properites. A priority queue will be thing with the priority we want will get out first, whether it be the smallest or the largest.
<!--more-->
There are different ways to actually implement priority queues. The way that we see here is a heap. There are two types of heaps, min-heaps and max-heaps. min-heaps will return you the smallest thing in the heap, max-heaps, the largest. Heaps can be visualized as a complete binary tree with the heap property. Like the BST property, this is a recursive invariant. The heap property is that no child key is less than its parent's key. That also means that all of the subtrees in a heap are also heaps within themselves. As a reminder a complete binary tree is one where ever row is full except for the last row, which will be filled from left to right. 

What's nice about the fact that we're having a heap be a complete binary tree is that we can represent a heap with an array. That's nice because arrays are fast. We could do it with actual node and references, but arrays are faster in practice. So we will have each node in the tree map to an array index based on the level of the node in the tree. We leave index 0 of the array empty to help us with this bookkeeping. The root will be at index 1. Any aribitrary node's children will be at 2i and 2i\+1, where i is the index of the node. Why does this work? I suggest mulling on that fact for a bit for yourself.

Now getting the min itself is easy. It's just the thing at index 1, the thing at the root. The more interesting operations are inserting something into our heap and removing the min item. To insert something, we'll place is at the next free spot in the tree, at the right most index of the array (not index 0 though). But wait, doesn't this break the heap property? So what shall we do. We fix it of course, by bubbling up the entry until the heap property is maintainged again. That is, for a min-heap, while the key that we just inserted is less than its parent, we'll keep swapping it with its parent. How long will this take? Well in worst case, the item we inserted is the smallest item. That means that it must go all the way to the root. Since it's a complete binary tree, if we have N items in the heap, the height of the tree is $\lg(N)$. Thus insertion runs in $\Theta(\lg(n))$ time in worst case. In best case, we added a really large element to the heap, one that is bigger that its parent, so it will run in $\Theta(1)$ time in best case.

As for removal, we can just get rid of the root. But now we have a hole, so what should we fill it with. Well remember that we want a complete binary tree, so the only thing we can replace it with will be the last element in the tree. Once again we might have violated the heap property. So what will we do? Fix it, this time by bubbling down. While the key we used to replace the removed root is bigger than its child(ren), we will swap it. If it's only bigger than one of its children, we only have one choice to swap it with. If it's bigger than both of its children, then we will swap it with the smaller child. The runtime for this will be like for insertion, for similar reasons. 
